I believe I'm really working hard at it.
three, four weeks myself.
But I felt very smart because this guy was, you know, really needing help.
So I helped him through his little beginning struggles and so on.
And by the way, the next time I saw him, he was doing some fabulous stuff.
And I watched him.
I said, my God.
First of all, I said, how are you doing?
He said, I'm doing it.
I looked what he was doing.
I couldn't believe it.
And it turned out that he was, he had helped build computers.
He knew everything about it.
He knew it, except
that he didn't know how to log in.
I mean, that's a little thing you have to learn.
And so he became, in a way, a kind of... He taught me a lot of things.
We became friends.
And I got him... He was a Milton scholar in the English grad school.
But he's really interested to lay here.
And I got him appointed as a computer adjunct to the English department.
And he did a lot of important things for us.
And he helped found this IRIS school.
And they developed a hypertext software called Intermedia.
And a professor friend of mine, George Landau, got interested in this stuff.
Landau's famous.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, Landau was involved with IRIS.
helped to develop Intermedia and was the first to use it.
So, in the late 80s, he was urging me to get into it myself and teach a course.
Well,
That was kind of more than I wanted to get involved with.
It looked kind of complicated.
My own, you know, things to do.
And I thought, well, I'll get a student, right?
There was a student who was very keen on getting into it, a grad student, and I wanted to get him a teaching job for a year, teaching a beginning hypertext workshop.
And I failed.
I cried, and he said, no, if you apply for it, it might do well.
We can't do this for a student.
So I went away on a sabbatical.
And I came back, and I had a...
a free course to choose.
I was teaching a workshop and I could teach something else.
I ran into Landau and the course of it was, all right, I'll have a go.
But at this time, I still had never had a mouse in my hand.
I had no idea about these things.
I'd never played with Windows at all.
I was still a DOS user thoroughly.
I'd created my own macros and so on inside DOS, but I had no idea.
I'd never, this is pre-Windows, and I'd never...
dinner on a Mac and just looked over people's shoulders at him.
So I taught, of course, and I taught on Macs, because you had that window.
I got an assistant, a senior undergraduate, who was badgering me to be his undergraduate advisor for his thesis, and I was turning him down, and then we got into his hypertext stuff, and he said, wouldn't you like a TA for that course?
He said, yeah, he had Landau's course, so he made a deal.
I would be his advisor, he'd be my TA.
That fellow is Robert Arellano, who is still there.
Well, Bobby is really, really good, and I've managed over the years to keep finding him.
So he's on a presidential fellowship there now for three years, and teaching my hypertension workshops on the way.
So he was my team.
We had a class, and we had about ten students, brave students, decided to have a go.
They didn't know what this was, and I didn't know what it was.
And there was nothing quite published.
There were a couple of things that Eastgate was producing at that time, but Michael Joyce's afternoon was still handed around to us.
It wasn't, you know, it wasn't, well, I think, in fact, at least it was just about to publish it.
The copy we had was stuff that was, somebody had a copy and they'd pass it around.
So all of the early hypertext fiction was still in the developmental stage.
And there was a group at Brown, which I often went to their meetings, called CHUG, Computers and Humanities Users Group.
And CHUG, CHUG invited...
people to come talk about computer issues and humanities, and library issues very typically, for example.
I was aware of how libraries were changing back in the mid to late 80s, attending those meetings.
And Stuart Malthrop and Michael Joyce, they had been invitees, so I'd seen a bit what they were doing.
and they left stuff behind which I looked at.
So we had some sense of it.
We didn't know really.
I was completely unaware of what would happen and that's what that first piece was based on was that kind of opening experience, opening awareness of how the stuff worked.
I don't confess to my 60s involvement with a similar idea but that's what made it easy so that I was not
I was not surprised at the possibility.
In fact, they looked like enhancements that were attractive.
And just to go back, what did you call that machine?
Did you have a name for that machine?
Well, it was just edge-knots cards, and you used a punch and steel needles.
That's all.
And it was basically an early database?
Yeah, yeah.
It was a database idea.
And in fact, it was a kind of...
hand-punched way of doing what was developing shortly thereafter, in the early 70s, were those computer cards that you'd see.
I don't know if you ever saw the composer's work.
I was at Princeton for a year and got to know Babbitt and all his people there and had this electronic, the Princeton-Columbian electronic music center.
And the computer music was just catching on.
It's a new idea.
But it was done with these immense decks of punched cards.
I mean, immense decks of punched cards to get a little bit of sound.
I mean, it wasn't to get much.
It was just a huge thing.
Well, mine was like an even more primitive version of that because those punches, at least you could order up these.
I had to actually get the punch out and look like that.
Was it an exercise for you or was it actually useful as a retrieval system for information?
It would have been.
very useful but for the fact that the punching took a lot longer than the note-taking and it led to ideas you'd be take a card that would have i don't know about hypertext let's say i had written some notes about it and i would see that there would be reason to punch it for reasons of uh of hypertext and for reasons of computers writing but also maybe because of its content for reasons of uh of um
oh, I don't know, some social issue or some question about time and space or whatever.
And the more I thought about the way to punch it, of course, I'd get more and more punches, I would think of new notes to take.
So I'd be writing six or seven notes while I was working to punch the one card.
So I ended up with lots of unpunched cards in a few of them.
That was my problem.
And I probably had, in the end, generated a few thousand cards and still exist like three-by-fives, really, because...
I figured out the binary idea was a way to do something fast and so that if it was bibliography or if it was certain kinds of content or something like that it didn't say anything else at least yeah I could find it through that down the narrow edge I had about 12 or 16 punches here that I divided up into things that were quick
access of a comic.
I said, well, that was something about history or something about, you know, those kind of large topics.
So I could needle those out in a hurry, and I did manage to punch those up pretty quickly.
So most of the cards have one punch on the other side, but that's about it.
Now, as a novelist, as a traditional linear print sense, do you have a sense of permanence?
I mean, do you have a permanence of the text
of what you created and having it be made of that?
Well, yes and no.
I mean, the permanence of the text will exist in the computer.
It won't exist on paper.
So already there's a kind of anomaly about it that what we think of as permanence has already moved to light anyhow.
To light.
There will always be, as there are still monastery libraries with valuable manuscripts under glass, there will always be this kind of respect for the Gutenberg tradition as it moves into its museum status.
It's a very cumbersome technology relative to the movement of light.
Moving a book, moving the volume.
around, hundreds of these things around, in trucks, using up petrol and shelf space and warehouse space and so on, is incredibly cumbersome compared to computer storage.
So, I think publishing, for example, years ago I asked publishers, I mean, just before I even got into hypertext,
in the late 80s, I was asking, why are they actually publishing their books?
Why don't you get the bookstores to do the publishing?
They provide, you provide your text by computer, in other days by disk, now by email, provide them the text and they can do the printing and binding and so on.
There's no need to have this huge warehousing and pulping and having all these stocks, but of course,
business is used to owning things that they sell.
They're not, you know, toothpaste or toilet paper or books.
And so they think of it as, you don't have product, it's not, you know, they're getting out of that finally, but they couldn't kind of perceive that.
Now it's going to happen.
And I think in the next decade, not even the same millennium,
there will be increasing publishing by the bookstores, and the bookchains especially, they may actually start hiring their own little editorial staffs and just do it straight.
And the idea will be that with a kind of inexpensive binding mechanism and cover design can also be done computerized and moved by light, they will produce all the books in their bookstores.
You come in, you'll come in and say,
I would like a copy of this.
There'll be a sample copy.
I'd like a copy of that and come back in the afternoon.
It's there.
I went to the MIT Media Lab for this book, this project I'm working with.
There's a young man there, 29 years old, and he's hitting the project called the e-book, the electronic book.
I've heard of this.
And it will look like a regular codex.
And they said they're two or three years away from it, and they're doing this with electronic ink.
And you will load each one of these volumes that you'll buy with a little chip.
It'll have 3,000 books in it.
And you dial up the book that you want.
And then each page, we have a paper or a text book.
You'll read the book.
And each page will be a screen.
And we're working on this.
My wife, in fact, found this item, and I went to...
But we're still talking about... Soft screens.
And we're still talking about discrete work that is not changing.
I guess when I... I say between hypertextual... When I'm talking about permanence, I'm talking about artistic recreation and expression.
There's no need for hypertextual change, either.
I mean, the interactivity that's so much brooded about is not necessarily a standard feature of this stuff.
The...
There is.
We're having, in fact, I'm getting a conference on these issues at Brown next spring.
Inviting a lot of the techies in and mixing them up with writers so that we try to get the right... Right now, much of this is, especially as seen on the Internet, is...
It's hostile to text, and the idea of text, yeah, and the idea of text of any kind is hostile to anything that isn't Victorian or oral.
And to try to create a warmer atmosphere for this in the way they develop any technology.
The issue arises about the future of fiction, and there is a strong feeling amongst a lot of people.
The future of fiction looks a little like games play, and therefore it is instable, and it does have a lack of permanence in a sense.
Each text continues to develop as the games players play with it.
But there's another kind of narrative art which exists inside
um the hypertextual medium that is itself a fixed entity is not it's not read twice the same as a 10 meters print book it's just uh it exists as a as a whole finished and enclosed thing one of the things we we do about
doing my hyper-fictional effects, which are really focused on not the games-playing metaphor, but upon the traditional narrative metaphors, is to ask, how do you achieve organicity in such a fluid medium?
I mean, when you have a reader entering into your narrative space with so many possibilities, the way they can approach the text,
How do you not having the support of the page-turning mechanism create a feeling of an organic whole?
And this is a terrible challenge.
It's not easy.
Do people experience this today?
Is there a reader of the future that has to be required to come along with the fiction of the future?
I mean, are there people that enjoy this kind of reading experience today?
Oh, yeah.
Is it an artistic sense?
I don't know how, I don't know how.
Or recreational sense?
I'm wondering what it is.
Well, most of it's recreational still.
In terms of readers, I mean, not in terms of writers.
Better writers.
But then, it's true of books.
I mean, it's true of books.
All the great writers, few of the great writers I know have any audience.
And that's even true of great writers in the past who've got to
vertical audience through time.
They've got tremendous respect amongst a few people in each generation, but are not widely read.
Dampty's still not a bestseller.
Shakespeare comes close in this country, but not most other places, but Cervantes.
I mean, you can almost, there's almost no writer who at any given moment
in time had sold widely.
A letter we would describe as a great letter.
Well, one that the permanence of his text means something.
A lot of permanent texts could just as well be done, because, you know, there's a lot of crap that's kept as permanent texts.
And it's kind of this awesome respect for the book that emerged out of the way the book evolved out of the Middle Ages, out of the panastic libraries, the secrets hidden away that one would anticipate existed in the book once everybody could get their hands on it.
You know, how the book of Revelations might be really understood as a now contemporary language.
And the Kabbalah idea.
And...
That awe for books, with terrible crimes and burning books and so on, that we feel is misplaced in a large sense.
There's a lot of rubbish that really should be put back in the toilet paper.
But we don't do it because we know nobody can make the judgment.
What gets booked is apt to be the best stuff.
kind of rat, not the worst.
The computer, of course, voids all of that, because nothing needs—now we really have permanents, right before, books decay in libraries, you get burnt out for single copies banished, and so on.
That needs never happening, but now we do have a true program.
Well, except that there is a question that we don't.
I mean, a lot of the stories we see
We see data taken from some of these space probes.
It's not even 15 years old, and they can't even access it.
It's deteriorating.
There is no guarantee that... No, there never is.
There never is.
I agree.
All I meant was that the technology itself works
as a more efficient library than the libraries do.
That's what I mean, in your doing of libraries.
And that although, of course, they fail to everything, to everything human fails, they have more of a chance of achieving those goals that those are desirable goals.
than our traditional methods i know there's a lot of problems first one of the things the main issue that we're bringing up in our brown conference is standards because one of the huge problems is changing standards um that all the stuff i did after i've got to move now to windows and uh
it'll eventually become more or less unreadable, even though it exists on disks, backup disks, and so on.
People will have to find old programs to read, which, you know, may not be easily accessible.
It's like lost languages or stuff like any new kinds of translators.
But one of the standards that was a kind of amazing standard, I remember
I remember it was fairly recently, it must have been, well, within the last five years or so, someone pointed out to me that asking ASCII is only like 20 years old or something like that.
It's very recent.
I mean, it's a really, really recent idea.
And yet it's old.
Yeah, it's the oldest thing we've got, really, in a way.
And you worry that, what if suddenly that were changed?
If you moved from that to something else, because something would be more efficient, what would be the consequences of that?
And, of course, it would immediately make inaccessible just vast areas.
It doesn't mean that you couldn't quite quickly translate everything into the new and discard the old.
That's one of the great advantages, if you don't have to
It doesn't have irreplaceable physical content.
Its physical content is, as with all digitized information, is in its reproduction.
We will eventually digitize everything, smells and technical stuff.
So all of our central experiences can be in some manner digitized, but it only means that you put a code in that can somehow, something at the other end can actually translate that code back into the real things.
So that if you put in the note C, you know, in digitized form, it comes out C on some loudspeak, some system that reads it and reproduces that sound.
So anything like tactile experiences or anything that has to do with our information exchange can be digitized and reproduced, provided at the other end there is something that can reproduce it.
And that's always the difficult thing, why we do these complicated suits and
you know, glasses and so on for virtual reality, is because the hard part is not digitizing, but undigitizing.
You might get back into something.
So, the problem of standard shifts and tape deterioration and so on really is not an impossible one to answer, because we're not dealing with
with objects that have to be in some way preserved.
We're dealing with the spec-wise tape that that stuff is stored on.
But basically, we're dealing with something that can be translated quickly into any other kind of form.
The term they use now is migration.
Someone has to be assured of the migration tape.
They say it's always zeros and ones in the China system.
I went through this at Cornell, and they were all headshots up there.
This whole thing was going on.
Well, in fact, Piper took it again.
Well, not hypertext.
The real use of it became up there, because hypertext began with Ted Nelson, who came to Brown, actually, at a very critical moment, his career in Brown's development.
He was brought there by a graphics man called Andrews Van Damme, Andy Van Damme.
Andy was one of the early pioneers in computer graphics.
And Nelson came and did a...
a lot of research in hypertextual form.
Have you read his work at all?
No.
Computer Lib, and, um... I didn't bring along it.
By email, I'll send you.
Okay.
Well, there's a conversation out on the web right now.
I participated in it.
It was called, um...
rethinking ted nelson or something like that so i'll send you the uh i'll send you the url for that it's it's speed magazine speed feed f-e-e-d and uh they deal with four of his different four concepts thinker toys idea and his links and he was the guy that developed the whole idea of hypertext his invention the word this is
was a kind of 60s guru for all this stuff and but at cornell uh is where they formed up this little group with extra stewart and most of i think i don't know story the nancy kaplan in her kitchen she now lives with the first gatherings of these people began and this is so important
Well, I'm writing about Cornell, and they just seem to come up in this context every place I've seen.
My son was a Cornell grad, so I got to know Cornell well.
But Nancy's now in Baltimore.
She lives with Stuart Miltrup, who's the Cypotex guy.
She's a very bright woman.
If you're doing all this stuff, she'd be a good person to talk to.
Kaplan?
Kaplan, yeah.
K-A-P-L-A-N?
Yeah.
At Hopkins, you said?
No, at the University of Baltimore.
University of Baltimore.
Yeah.
Well, Stuart's there, too, and Stuart's very good to talk to.
I think Stuart's the wisest and most innovative of all the hypertext writers right now.
Stuart Malthrop.
M-O-U-L-T-H-R-O-P.
This is his novel I talk about here.
which I found much too academic, Victory Garden.
But he's moved away from that immensely.
He's working very vigorously out on the net, which is a hard thing to do.
It's a very hard environment to work in.
And he's really trying to subvert and convert it.
And he's a very valuable person.
You've got how many novels here?
I don't know if it's heavy.
A dozen, perhaps?
More than that.
What's the more exciting medium for you to write in now?
Well, it's not so much exciting.
I tend to work on several things at once and have done since I began writing them.
And it means that there are like 50 to 100 projects unfinished always.
They're all sitting there like ideas or paragraphs or chapters or something that should be done.
What I was looking at now, I'm trying to work on a piece that I began in 1969 when I moved here.
I just made a movie, a documentary film at Iowa, called On a Confrontation in Iowa City.
It had to do with the Vietnam War protests.
And this was in the 60s?
Yeah.
I shot it all, and I had helped develop the film, and I had A and B wrote it, and I'd done it all.
I just wanted to learn everything I could learn about filmmaking at that time.
So I came away with a story idea, which I began then when I moved here, and interrupted it to work on a public burning, I thought, for six months, and five, six years went by.
And then I would keep taking it with me every while I went and working on it, but then something else would take over it.
I went to Venice with it, and Penopio to Fulbright, etc.
And so I brought it here again.
Now that's, you know, we're 30 years later, and I'm still working on this text.
It's in the form of nine novellas, really, long novellas.
It's about a pornographic film we wrote.
Link to use the current text?
No, no, not really.
It's very narrative, very much a book narrative.
in which this pornographic film hero, his whole life has lived in film, and the films, each of the time, are made by a different woman filmmaker.
So there's nine women making these films.
And it's very hard work.
It's very, very hard work.
So it's one reason I resist it all the time and do something else instead.
But because I have so many of these sorts of things, it's never been a huge temptation to really get into writing about things.
I like teaching it.
I like to see what happens to students' heads when they get into it.
They become much better readers, much better writers.
Do they?
Oh, it transforms that perception of what... I used to, back in the 60s, I used to teach a course, I still taught it right up into the late 80s, called Exemplary Ancient Fictions.
And we read creation myths and...
The Gilgamesh Epic, and Enuma Elish, and Book of Genesis, and Greek stories, and myths, and Romans, and all the metamorphoses, and folktales, and various things on up to medieval romance.
And the whole idea of this thing was it was a writing course.
They had to do a certain amount of academic work, but they also had to do some creative work.
The whole idea was to work with writers to help them understand narrative strategies that were pre-Servantes was my cutting off point, and to perceive the possibility of narrative beyond what was, in those days,
the standard form.
As of before, Star Trek movies and, you know, a lot of things that might have inspired the imagination just weren't there, and that we had these kind of dull, insistent repetitions of the past in terms of form.
And the inability to see, until we worked at it, how conventional the so-called well-made story or the novel was.
I mean, it was not something that was natural, as often felt to be, but depended
I didn't use the words in those days, but the Pentagon booked technology for the feeling of being in the right place, you know, being the right thing for that medium.
But we were working on forms that escaped this limitation.
And those ancient sections we'd work all semester long, and only sort of in closing moments of weeks.
the light would begin to dawn, and something would begin to happen with the writing that would escape this limitation.
Undergraduates were more quick to catch on, but the grad students were dreadful.
They were so ironclad already in their notion of what writing ought to be.
I taught my first hyperfiction workshop, and the first week it was over.
I mean, that part was done.
You just sat down and you started, and what happened?
I mean, there was a sudden awareness about form.
You start with nothing, and so you have to build everything.
If you want line, you've got to put it there.
And the discovery of that, and the discovery, therefore, of how reading was done, and how writing fed the reading, and how the form dictated both,
was suddenly, or the technology dictated the form of the table, was suddenly transparent.
And so the leap is sort of instantaneous and simply non-problematic.
Then, of course, it becomes interesting, well, you know, what's the wonderful things about it?
What are the great moments of your book-reading life?
And are these gone if we're in this space, or can we somehow find a way to...
to do the same thing here, is it possible?
And that's kind of the challenge.
Of course, I'm dealing with very modest writers, students for the most part, and there have been no great writers yet working in hypotech, so dealing with people whose books I read them, I'd have mixed feelings about.
Well, I'm not just talking about students, you know, there have been no great writers yet in hypotech.
No.
That's an important statement, right?
In my second review, which you've read, I review, at that time, all the extensions.
Nobody gets a big plus.
There's always a little twist at the end, even the positive reviews.
But there's good stuff, there's good writing, as good as most stuff you'll find in books.
We don't have a Joyce or Cervantes.
Of course, Cervantes was 150 years after Gutenberg.
know it may take a while before we find the committed writer who's so engaged and so understands the medium and so loves it that writes the thing that you know overwhelms us what would be the mark of genius in your view i'm not so sure i can especially when you're engaging the participation of the reader i can't i can't say for sure i know the things that have worked so far that suggest
I have no idea what, in the end, it will be.
One reason for that is that one of my frettings is the demotion of text itself, the diminution of its importance and power.
I'm struggling against that, but this may, in the future, look like a
Dinah Saurik struggled, and it may be that all narrative in the future will be multimedia, and that this idea of text alone will be an old-fashioned idea that will be revisited like a kind of scholarly or playful exercise.
I hope not, because what I feel to be the most interactive thing we do is
look at those little squiggles on a page or screen and convert them in our heads into vast landscapes and complex characters and all sorts of things that happen inside our heads just by
reading these little coded things here.
Just putting a few of your words out in these articles, you say, fluidity, contingency, indeterminism, plurality, discontinuity, every kind of principles of paper text.
We have absolute, absolute.
Yeah, I'm not saying necessarily those are all positives.
I'm saying that they're reality.
And that, therefore, it's a little hard for me working pretty much
in the old print medium to foresee in 1990s exactly what great narrative art's going to look like in this medium fifty years from now.
Do you think this is inevitable in your view?
Oh, yeah.
Digitization is inevitable.
I mean, the minute I understood digitizing, the minute I got the little glimmer out of it, oh, yeah, I got this, it's going to be a total revolution.
It's just so obvious.
And, I mean, it may not be a revolution that lasts a million years, but it's certainly going to last for the next few hundred years, I'm sure.
And this characteristic, the characteristics of digital information, you have to be alert to and aware of to understand what's going to happen.
And that's all I've been trying to do, and what most people have been trying to do,
and there are a lot of prophets and a lot of people who are have kind of convictions about what's going to happen but so far i've not been convinced by anything yet i don't see it so what i work with my students are traditional concepts they're not they're not they are they emerge from print so we talk about voice for example because voice seems to hold our hypertext together when nothing else does if the thing is all fragmentary things at least
convincing and compelling voice.
Let's say a writer like Joyce who was working in this space or Samuel Beckett.
Just the texture of the voice itself would be compelling enough to convince the reader that it's worth carrying on through a space that is a little bit hard to map in the sense of
I don't know exactly where.
I don't know what page I'm on.
I don't know how much earlier I got to go.
These are questions that you run into or something.
And voice is a counterbalance against the feeling of dispersion and non-discontinence.
But that's one.
As I already mentioned, I'm already looking for
what creates organic unity in a work that is not a linear text, one of the answers to that tends to be that the narrative tends to be looked at like a physical space, not something that is strung on a line, but something that exists
here is the same kind that exists here and it's like books do if you reread a book you know books you go back i've gone back to the ulysses on donkey only many times i no longer go back to the from page one to the end i go back to the
where I want to go.
I know them well, and I can go at any point in them, and I can search out things and just think about those aspects of that narrative.
So this requires a fresh reading, a prior reading.
Yes, yes, it does.
But the fact is that it exists then in my mind as a landscape and not as a linear narrative as such.
I mean, I understand the linear nature of it,
And that can be true, although I also can understand its spatial aspect.
So if I'm inventing a narrative in hypertext, I will tend to think of it in some ways, perhaps, or I might possibly think of it, as a narrative that exists whole and instantaneously in space.
Now there are ways in which you can
important off-spaces that cannot be reached into certain spaces to the distance.
So you can create a kind of limited sort of linear direction to something, if you want it, if you need it.
Maybe you don't.
Your memory doesn't.
And the only way that the memory requires linearity is that it's a big geographical space, which you think is back on those years.
If I ask you to tell me, you know, well, how did you get into
how did you get into this work of writing, these sorts of books?
You wouldn't say, well, I was born on such and such a day, and I was born in a hospital, in a hospital at some point at a time.
You don't start that way.
You start, well, and you tell me an experience you had, and that experience leads to another.
And even if you're telling me, you're probably thinking of other things you're not going to tell me, but a flash to mind is what is all.
And this is all hypothetical experience.
And so if students work in a space that has a kind of
spatial concept already then it sometimes makes it easier to create a structure that has walls that has limits has a wholeness and it doesn't matter if the reader explores it all i don't need to explore the entirety of your memory nor do you for that matter to arrive at a rather full understanding of you or of whatever the issue is or whatever the stories we're talking about and um
All reading experiences are, by their nature, linear.
And so the linear experience is imposed upon this space willy-nilly.
You can't escape the way we live in time.
The way we approach a narrative is to step into it at a certain moment and leave it at a certain moment.
And as this process unfolds, it's a linear experience.
even though what we're doing is rifting perhaps a geographical landscape in which the choices we make are all right about how we're going to face here.
That aspect of it, that paradox, as it were, can be part of the narrative itself and become
as it was in Don Quixote, become an element in it.
But Don Quixote exists and does a discrete, complete, unchanged work.
Well, it's a kind of hypertext.
It can also just complete and unchanged.
I mean, in fact, if you buy any of these discs by Michael Joyce, they are what they are.
You put the disc in, you read it, and you take the disc out.
It's like having a book.
It's just that the book doesn't have page-turning mechanisms.
It has a different kind of mechanism.
But when we talk about the hypertext, we also talk about the experience of engaging the reader to develop their own scenarios.
That's a different kind of writing.
That's why I was saying it.
There are those who see it as a kind of games playing and believe that all the great fiction of the future will have this characteristic.
There will be a huge mass of databases in which the writer enters into the database
and creates their own narrative that were out of the potential there and structures those elements and adds elements as they want to.
That's the kind of Dungeons and Dragons way of going at fiction.
But that's not the only way that it's being done, at least at this time.
What happens in the future, I can't say.
At this time, I see the likelihood that the author, far from being dead, is very much alive.
The author is going to become, in some respects, like a film director.
in that he will require additional talents to fulfill everything he wants to do in the narrative.
So that if you want graphic material, you want sound, you want some other things, voiceover, whatever, you're going to have to get some other talent to help you out.
But it's still going to be your work, and it probably, probably,
you're not going to allow tampering.
I mean, probably.
You're not going to allow it, but it's essentially tampering.
It may or may not be.
I mean, some people think it's kind of fun, the idea of opening up, and they may write something that's very exciting.
Some people being the reader, but how about the creator who wants to have it?
There are creators who like the idea that, please, get in here and change all this and rewrite it.
And they provide what you might call a
a playground or a jungle gym, you know, something that kind of framework that you can play around on.
You can do your own kind of thermostat, you can invent stuff and put anything around this one.
But what indoors?
What indoors?
I mean, if we define an age by its cultural... No, yeah, but that's one of them.
Then we can see, yeah, but how do you know if one of these interactions is magnificent and it only exists at one time, but it's, I mean...
Maybe you're missing something here.
Well, that may be the nature of the age and what makes it great, if viewed from a certain angle.
It may be seen that this appetite for permanence and so on is a perverse appetite.
It's been religious with us.
Yeah, and then finally we're shedding it, you know, finally getting rid of this thing.
and understand life as it really is lived.
I'm just giving it art, being the devil's advocate.
I'm still basically a book writer and reader.
That's very important.
No, I still basically am.
It's just that I don't have any hostility to all of this.
So I feel comfortable.
I don't feel...
I don't feel uncomfortable.
I don't work in it.
I actually am sort of playing around with the hypertext right here now.
But even as I'm doing it, I'm simultaneously doing it in a linear form.
Did you bring some examples of hypertext?
Did you mention that you might... Well, I have disks, but I have only my copies.
I should have copied.
It's all on Macs.
I'm working on PCs.
I've always worked on them.
There's stuff on Macs I've got at home, but I could have sent to you anything you wanted, really.
By the way, I would be happy to show you the quotes.
I've got problems showing subjects what I've written before I use it to make sure we get it right.
You've not looked at any of these guys?
I've had people like Joyce and most of them.
Joyce, I haven't.
I've got the hypertext book for questions, Landau's book.
All right.
Well, George Landau is a great enthusiast.
He's one of these guys who just has this kind of wonderful optimism about the form.
It's fun to quote him because it's full of
sort of hyperbolic anticipation but um but he's not a writer i mean he's not a creative writer so you really ought to look at what uh there's an interesting essay i only have a single copy of it by jack barrett did you ever see that
I can access it.
Yeah, I was going to be reading it.
Wilson Portals, Spring 96.
It's opposed to it all, of course.
It's a little bit ignorant, but it's not that.
One of my students went down there as a grad student, one of my undergrad students went down there as a grad student, and got Jack excited at Hopkins, got him excited about the whole thing.
And so he quotes him a lot, and the kid did a demo, and he was kind of the worst person to show a skeptic what could be done in his form, because he was one of these, he's a really nice guy, but he's one of these, you know, I think I'm sort of Joyce Carol Oates-type writers, it just spills out, you know, never stops, it's never rewritten, I mean, there's tons of it, it's quite dull.
And so it kind of convinced Barthes.
First, it looked very much like print fiction, and second, it was much more boring than print fiction.
And so he got kind of the wrong message.
Are you here in that sabbatical?
Yeah.
And what, are you going back to Brown?
Well, I'm going back in August, but not to Brown.
I'm going back to South Carolina first.
Well, I'll be back there in January, and I'll be back to Oklahoma for that.
There's a film that C-Squad did, I think,
The Symposium of Brown?
No, yeah.
Yeah.
It was okay.
I haven't seen it very soon.
No, you didn't do our best sessions.
Our best sessions were architectural.
The ones I did are not.
We've been sort of leading players in that chug group, starting as not with the development of the technology, but with how humanists can make use of it.
and how technology can be bent to suit the needs of students in both ways, which is kind of what conference I'm organizing, which is going to be aimed solely at fiction writing.
It's not going to be typical of all the other stuff about, say, libraries or teaching history courses or something like that.
It's just about what fiction writers want and need in the technology
what the tech people have as ideas that might excite the practice.
Is this a separate department at Brown, or is it a Lewis department?
No, it's a mixed-up thing.
In fact, it staggers along.
It doesn't—Chug is voluntary.
Grad students organized it, and then faculty started to attend it.
And the Chuck Group leaders, the group of them that were kind of interesting, I got to know well.
And after my first hypertext course, I took
I learned about a lot of things.
I learned about very interesting things going on at Brown.
I learned about the graphics.
I'd never been up there.
We had a virtual reality machine.
I didn't know that.
I took all my students to do it.
And then I learned about, of course, MCM had its, uh, it just got into digitizing film equipment and audio equipment.
And there was a mathematician, Tom Banchoff, working in a hypertextual format.
There were students working on
on screen, in a text that they called up, and there were models, and there were formulae, and the models could be looked at solid or just in lines, and they could be rotated, they would move if you set them moving, and then you could change the formula a little bit, and you would see the distortion switch in the way the mathematical models altered.
All along the way, there would be language that sometimes needed a definition, so you'd have a hypertextual link to understand the meaning of that word, or to look up a formula, etc.
And every so often a student would come across a question, asking now, then, what, and ask a question.
And they'd have to answer, and the answer would be automatically emailed to a TA.
And the TA, if online, while a student would be able to get an answer back.
No, this was almost ten years ago.
Banshoff wrote,
The book on the fourth dimension and then, or the fifth dimension, and then succeeding dimensions thereafter.
And so I learned about, and there was an electronic music studio located in a very, just one little tiny room, about a third of the size of this room that just piled up with equipment.
And so I decided that all of this stuff should somehow interlink, it's all digital stuff, and it should all find a kind of common base.
There was an archeological dig going on in Tetra, organized by a computer genius there as a totally hyper, a total computer-driven event.
And everything was
was recorded in computerized formats, and they've got new equipment that actually triangulates the space.
We've all done something.
Information went immediately to the computer database.
Every little fragment or anything that came up would be photographed in each dimension, so you could spin it around afterwards.
All that stuff was done just doing the dig.
The dig is still going on, by the way.
Well, I saw all this stuff happening, so I thought it was time to organize them.
The Chug group, the leaders, were trying to organize something called the scholarly—it ended up being called the scholarly technology group.
They had other names for it, fancy ones at first.
And so, they were ex-grad students who were lingering, but were the young geniuses on that ground.
We said, well, let's find a space.
We found a basement of Bradson that wasn't being used for much of anything.
So I took the Provost on what was called a Hyperland Tour.
And we organized and ended up a lot of developing people coming along, presidential staff and so on.
And we took them on literally a walking tour all over campus to all of these sites.
The Provost was suffering from the residuals of a flu.
And by the time I got to the end of it, he was just absolutely pooped.
took them through all these things, walked them into Banchoff's mathematics office.
They were convinced this had no place in terms of support, because it had nothing to do with the students.
It was just faculty special.
No.
And we were showing them how much it was, mostly undergrad, not even grad students.
They arrived in Banchoff's office, and Banchoff had a meeting.
He had to go through.
Sorry, he could only be able to introduce what was going on, and then he had to leave.
But meanwhile, he'd leave this kid.
This kid looked like about 12 years old, a little girl.
She turned out to be a little older, but not much.
She was kind of young to miss the mathematics genius, undergrad, sophomore, and she was amazing.
She just left these old guys standing there agape as she showed them through this math book, online math book.
So we ended up at the ascent bottom, the basement of the grad center, very tired, sat on packing crates.
and said, all right, what we'd like to do is make this space a multimedia lab, a classroom, and a space for academic research in computer work, especially for humanistic research.
And we got it within 18 months.
It was hard work.
The provost actually backed down on it, but the president got excited.
And so that the Scholarly Technology Group exists.
The old CHUB Group is now hired as Scholarly Technology Group.
And they share half the space with us, and we have a multimedia lab that they've built, and we have a classroom which is all out, mainly.
And we're in conjunction with the music department, the art department, and modern culture media, and in computer science.
And history's a little bit involved, and actually anthropology got involved with us, too.
It's a committee.
I mean, it's just people volunteering.
We just, those of us who teach us get together and decide what to do and how to find money for it.
And we don't have any departmental money to call on.
We have to go straight to the administration or to other sources.
AT&T's been helping us.
So which department, ostensibly, do you work out of that?
How long have you been teaching?
About 20 years.
You said at Brown.
I think you said at Princeton as well.
Well, I had these little gigs for a lot of different schools.
I lived on the writing, and then my kids were college age.
So I went back to look for more permanent work.
I moved to Provincet and had a lot of friends.
I didn't have a job or anything, just moved on.
And taught at Brandeis for stuff, other objects, and teaching around before we got involved.
And so you're from Indiana originally, or in Rio, Indiana?
I never took 10, so it was something I refused.
It's an old 60s angle, but I always refused that.
When Bucks retired, they tried to put me this job, and I refused that.
I've always been a contract player, so I'm just now getting my contract removed for like six years.
Now that I'm 66, I've got a contract through in 72.
That's great.
Mark, it's fascinating, you know, I'm going to leave you in just a minute.
Other side.